Add JOSS paper (#126)
jatkinson1000/archeryutils: paper/paper.md

---
title: 'archeryutils: a Python package for archery calculations'
tags:
  - Python
  - Sport
  - Archery
authors:
  - name: Jack Atkinson
    orcid: 0000-0001-5001-4812
    affiliation: 1,2
    corresponding: true
  - name: Thomas Hall
    orcid: 0000-0003-1689-6676
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Archery GB
    index: 1
  - name: Institute of Computing for Climate Science, University of Cambridge, UK
    index: 2
date: 08 December 2024
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The sport of archery lends itself well to mathematical analysis and indeed there
are several approaches to modelling performance across
different distances and target types.

> _archeryutils_ is a Python package that provides of base types and functions

Reviewer: Unsure if this is correct and intended or should be `provides base types...`?

Author: Yeah, you're correct, corrected in https://github.com/jatkinson1000/archeryutils/pull/126/commits/d7ac7071ae650bd256e2698c08aa307f7fa477f5

[@lane1979handicap; @lane1979variation] with equations made available in
@lane2013construction.
It was used to construct the original handicapping scheme of Archery GB, the
national governing body of archery in the United Kingdom.
An alternative model proposed by @park2014modelling is used by Archery Australia,
and forms the basis of their national ranking system.
It has also been applied in studies of competition performance and equipment
[@park2023using; @park2021relative].

# Examples of Use

_archeryutils_ is used in a range of applications.
Its origins lie in the development of the 2023 handicap model for Archery GB where it
was used in conjunction with competition data to develop and tune model parameters
[@handicaps].
It was subsequently used in the development of new Archery GB classification systems
[@outdoor_classifications; @indoor_classifications; @field_classifications].
The software provides the backend for the community website
[archerycalculator](https://archerycalculator.co.uk/), as well as being used in
several other applications and websites.

The models implemented by _archeryutils_ have previously been used in comparative

> analyses of athlete's performance and equipment, and it there is ongoing research in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
analyses of athlete's performance and equipment, and there is ongoing research in
```

> this are that uses the software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this area that uses the software.
```

are several approaches to modelling performance across
different distances and target types.

_archeryutils_ is a Python package that provides base types and functions
for developing code with archery applications, as well as implementations of popular
mathematical models used in the sport.

It is used in multiple applications including the development of websites
and apps for archers, conducting performance analysis for elite archers and governing
bodies, and in ongoing sports science research.

# Statement of Need

In the sport of archery athletes shoot targets at a variety of distances.
Further, these targets can be of different sizes and have different scoring systems
associated with them.
The overall goal is always the same, however; to shoot arrows as accurately and
precisely as possible.
For the purposes of analysis, it is therefore useful to be able to extract some comparative
measure of performance across all targets and distances.
As a precision-based sport, archery lends itself well to mathematical
modelling with examples in literature being @lane2013construction, @park2014modelling, and the
2023 handicap system by Archery GB [@handicaps].

> Like many scientific models, these are described in papers where they are used by
> the authors, but no software implementation is publicly available.
> This presents a barrier to further research and development for those who understand
> how to use the models, but not how they are constructed or implemented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although these models are well described in their respective papers, no software
implementations have been made publicly available, presenting a barrier to further
research and development.
```

Author: Add comment on reproducibility?

Reviewer 2: Maybe change the end to `...presenting a barrier to reproducibility and limiting further research and development`? I think I only raised this suggestion as I had to re-read the original a couple of times to parse it, but that might just be a 'me' problem.

Author: No, it _was_ verbose.
I think I decided the reproducibility side was covered elsewhere and tidied up in https://github.com/jatkinson1000/archeryutils/pull/126/commits/8ffb87761fae084a5a94f80b27c705c4536a7e6f

The _archeryutils_ API is easily combined with Python
data-processing packages, for example
pandas [@The_pandas_development_team_pandas-dev_pandas_Pandas; @mckinney2011pandas] or polars [@polars],
enabling users to perform analysis on these datasets
without needing to reimplement models themselves.

# Software Description

_archeryutils_ is a Python package distributed through the
[Python Package Index (PyPI)](https://pypi.org/project/archeryutils/) with full documentation,
including the API, provided online at
[archeryutils.readthedocs.io](https://archeryutils.readthedocs.io/)

At the core of _archeryutils_ are classes representing the core components of
the sport.
Perhaps the most notable of these are the `Target`, providing a representation
of a target of a particular size, distance, and face type, and the
`Round`, which builds upon this to represent of a series of targets shot at with a
number of arrows.
As well as a constructors for creating generic targets and rounds, _archeryutils_ comes
with many popular national and international rounds predefined for users.
These components provide a starting point for a variety of applications.

> Implementation of mathematical models for precision is provided by the `handicaps`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation of the mathematical models for precision can be found in the `handicaps`
```

module.

> Available models include both Archery GB handicap schemes of @lane2013construction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Available models include both the Archery GB handicap schemes of @lane2013construction
```

Author: Pushing word limit so will leave this for now.

and the updated 2023 model and both Archery Australia models of @park2014modelling,
all streamlined into a common API.
There is also the option for users to define custom models by
building on the abstract base class provided.

One other notable component of _archeryutils_ is the `classifications` module.
This provides an implementation of the [Archery GB classification progression
schemes](https://archerygb.org/resources/outdoor-classifications-and-handicaps)
in which archers are categorised and rewarded for their

> performance depending on their age, gender, and bowstyle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance depending on their age, gender, and bow style
```

Author: AGB uses "bowstyle", whilst WA uses "division".

Author: clarified 'division' in https://github.com/jatkinson1000/archeryutils/pull/126/commits/8ffb87761fae084a5a94f80b27c705c4536a7e6f

[@lane1979handicap; @lane1979variation] with equations made available in
@lane2013construction.
It was used to construct the original handicapping scheme of Archery GB, the
national governing body of archery in the United Kingdom.
An alternative model proposed by @park2014modelling is used by Archery Australia,
and forms the basis of their national ranking system.
It has also been applied in studies of competition performance and equipment
[@park2023using; @park2021relative].

# Examples of Use

_archeryutils_ is used in a range of applications.
Its origins lie in the development of the 2023 handicap model for Archery GB where it
was used in conjunction with competition data to develop and tune model parameters
[@handicaps].
It was subsequently used in the development of new Archery GB classification systems
[@outdoor_classifications; @indoor_classifications; @field_classifications].
The software provides the backend for the community website
[archerycalculator](https://archerycalculator.co.uk/), as well as being used in
several other applications and websites.

The models implemented by _archeryutils_ have previously been used in comparative

> analyses of athlete's performance and equipment, and there is ongoing research in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analyses of athletes' performance and equipment, and there is ongoing research in
```
